.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 3/8/13               \" DATE 
.Dt coord.in 1      \" Program name and manual section number 
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm coord.in ,
.Nd Coordinate definition input file for 
.Sy surfgen .
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
This input file is used by coupled potential surface fitting program
.Sy surfgen 
and its potential evaluation library.
For a detailed description of the program and the evaluation library, see
.Xr surfgen 1 ,
.Xr potlib 1
.Pp
Place
.Sy coord.in
in the same directory where
.Sy surfgen
is being called.
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
contains definition of the type, scaling mode, defining atoms and scaling parameters
for all the internal coordinates that are used as a basis for the expansion of Hd.
.br
.Nm 
also sets the maximum order for each coordinate, as well as additional order
conditions in the form of linear inequality constraints.
.Pp
For coordinates that are related by symmetry operations, only one of them should be 
defined.  All the symmetry related coordinates will be automatically added to form 
a group of coordinates, refered to as
.Em coordinate sets .
.br
For a list of active symmetry operations, call 
.Sy surfgen
with
.Em jobtype=-1 .
.Pp
Developed by 
.An Yarkony group , Johns Hopkins University 
2010-2013.
.\"
.Sh INPUT FORMAT
The file consists of the definitions of coordinate sets and the additional
order conditions.  The entire file use automatic formating, positions and the 
number of spaces or length of numbers will not affect the input.
.Ss Coordinate and Condition Counts
First line of 
.Sy coord.in
is a comment line left for the user to describe the coordinate system.
.br
The second line consists of two integers, providing the number of coordinate sets
.Sy nCoordSets
and the number of additional conditions 
.Sy nAddCond .
./"   -->>>>>  definition of coordinate sets  --->>>>>>
.Ss Coordinate Set Definitions
Coordinate set definition is composed of the definition of each of the 
.Sy nCoordSets
coordinate sets.   For each coordinate, the definition consists of 3 or 4 
lines, depending on the type and scaling mode of coordinates.   
.Pp
.Sy General Format
.Pp
The first line is a comment line.
The second line consists of three integers, which defines the type, scaling mode 
and maximum order of the coordinate.  
When maximum order is set to 0, no maximum will be imposed on this coordinate.
.br
The third line consists of four numbers, 
.Em A1 , A2 , A3 
and 
.Em A4 .  
All or some of these
defines the indices of atoms that are involved in the coordinates.  For coordinate
types that involve less than 4 atoms, the last one or more integers will not be
used by the program.  However, all 4 numbers will still need to be present, even
though some are not used.  
.br
The fourth line is present for type-scaling mode combinations
that require scaling parameter input.  This line contains two floating point or
scientific numbers that will be used to define the coordinates.  When scaling
parameters are not needed, this field should
.Em NOT
be present.
.Pp
See the following section for details about the available coordinate types and
scaling modes and the number of scaling parameters needed for each combination.
.Pp
.Sy Example
.Pp
This is an example for out-of-plane bend
.Bl -column xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
.It out-of-plane H O C H
.It -1 Ta 0 Ta  0
.It 1 Ta 5 Ta 2 Ta 4
.It 1.000 0.000
.El
.Pp
.Sy Coordinate Types
.Pp
The following coordinate types are currently implemented or planned:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It 0
Distance or scaled distance between two atoms.  The two atoms are permutable.
.It 1
Angle or scaled angle coordinate between 3 atoms, with the third atom being the vertex.
The two side atoms are permutable.
.It 2
Torsion or scaled torsion coordinate.
.It -1
Tetrahedron out-of-plane coordinate where all four vertices are permutable.  
The coordinate is defined from the scalar triple product of the three displacement
vectors launching from any one vertex
.Sy s=r1.(r2xr3) .
.It -2
Umbrella out-of-plane coordinate where 3 vertices are permutable, 
but one other atom is special.  
.br
.Sy The atom in position 1 is the special atom.
.br
The coordinate is defined from the scalar triple
product of the three displacement vector launching from the special atom
.Sy s=r1.(r2xr3) .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Scaling Modes
.Pp
.Em Scaling Modes for Distance Coordinates
.Pp
Scaling functions for all supported scaling modes of distance coordinates (
.Em type=0
) are given in the following list 
(All modes require 2 scaling parameters except for unscaled distance):
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxx
.It 0 
Unscaled
.It 1
Morse functions  
.Sy w= exp(-c1*(r-c2))
.It 2
Gaussian functions 
.Sy w=exp(-c1*(r-c2)**2)
.It 3
Leading term of screened Columb potential 
.Sy w=exp(-c1*(r-c2))/r 
(Yukawa potential)
.It 4
Long range term of screened Columb  
.Sy w=exp(-r/c2)*(r/c2)**c1
.It 5
Lennard Jones potentials 
.Sy w=(c2/r)**c1
.It 6
Shifted(chasmless) Yukawa 
.Sy w=exp(-c1*(r-c2))/(r+c2)
.El
.Pp
.Em Scaling Modes for Angle Bends
.Pp
Supported scaling modes for angle bends (
.Em type=1
) are
.Bl -tag -width xxxxx
.It 0 
Unscaled 
.Sy w=t .  
No scaling parameters.
.It 1
Cosine scaling 
.Sy w=Cos(t) .  
No scaling parameters.
.It 2
Distance scaled cosine scaling
.Sy w=Cos(t)/( 1+exp[c1*(r1^2+r2^2-c2^2)] ) ,
where 
.Sy r1 
and 
.Sy r2 
are the sides of the angle.
Two scaling parameters 
.Sy c1 
and 
.Sy c2 
are required.
.El
.Pp
.Em Scaling Modes for Torsion Coordinates
.Pp
Torsion coordinates (
.Em type=2
) are not yet fully implemented.
.Pp
.Em Scaling Modes for Tetrahedron Out-of-Plane Coordinates
.Pp
Supported scaling modes for tetrahedron out-of-plane coordinates (
.Em type=-1
) are shown in the following list.  2 scaling parameters are always required.  
Here the scalar triple product
.Sy s=r1.(r2xr3) 
and 
.Sy ri
denotes the array of all 
.Em 6
internuclear distances.
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxx
.It 0
Divide scalar triple product 
.Sy s 
by powers of the product of all 
.Em six 
distances: 
.Sy w=s/Product[ri]^C1
.It mode>0
Use the product of scaled distances(with the same mode) between each of the 6
atom pairs to scale the scalar triple product
.br
.Sy w=s*Product[Scale[ri]]
.It mode<0
Use power of the reciprocal of
.Em sum
of the distances as the scaling factor
.Sy w=s*(C2/Sum[rij])^(C1+3)
.El
.Pp
.Em Scaling Modes for Umbrella OOP Coordinates
.Pp
Umbrella OOP coordinates (
.Em type=-2
) are similar to tetraheron OOP coordinates.  However,
they experience different permutational properties due to one of the atoms being
treated special permutationally.   Like in the case of tetrahedron OOPs, two 
scaling parameters are always required.  The scaling options for umbrella OOPs
are listed below.  Note that some of these options differ from the tetrahedron case.
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxx
.It 0
Reciprocal scaled with 3 distances from the vertex
.Sy w=s/Product[ri]^C1
.It mode>0
Use product of the
.Em three
scaled distance coordinates as the scaling factor: 
.Sy w=s*Product[Scale[rij]]
.It mode<0
Use the 
.Em harmonic mean
of the three scaled distances as scaling factor:
.Sy w=s/Sum[1/Scale[rij]]
.br
.Em -mode
is used as the scaling mode for the distances and the scaling parameters are given
to them.
.El
.\"
.Ss Additional Order Conditions
Other than the maximum total order and total order for each coordinates, a set of
.Em additional conditions
can be used to further restrict the polynomial expansion in a more detailed manner.
Every addtional order condition implies one linear inequality constraint on the
orders of coordinate sets defined in the previous section.
.Pp
Each suction condition input occupies one line which contains 
.Sy nCoordSets+1
integers.  The first 
.Sy nCoordSet 
integers specify the multipliers for the order of each of the coordinate sets and
the last integer indicates the maximum of the weighed sum of orders.   
.Pp
For example, with 3 coordinate sets, the condition
.br
.Sy 2   1   0   6
.br
Implies that
.Em (total order of set 1)
*2+
.Em (total order of set 2)
<=6
.Pp
Total order of a coordinate set means the sum of the orders of all the coordinates
that are defined in a coordinate set, whether it is a coordinate directly specified
in the coordinate set definitin section, or a coordinate generated by a symmetry
operation.
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr connect.in 1
.Xr irrep.in 1 ,
.Xr potlib 1 ,
.Xr surfgen 1 ,
.Xr surfgen.in 1 ,
.Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs
Please send bug reports to 
.An Xiaolei Zhu Aq virtualzx@gmail.com
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner