.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 3/11/13               \" DATE 
.Dt points.in 1      \" Program name and manual section number
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm points.in ,
.Nd Point specific input file for
.Sy surfgen .
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
This input file is used by coupled potential surface fitting program
.Sy surfgen .
For a detailed description of the program and the evaluation library, see
.Xr surfgen 1 .
.Pp
Place
.Pa points.in
in the same directory where
.Sy surfgen
is being called.
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
contains input options that will be applied to individual points or set of points
during the surface fitting procedure of
.Sy surfgen .
.Nm 
is a
.Em FORMATTED 
input file.  Please read 
.Sx FORMAT
section for details.
.Pp
Developed by
.An Yarkony group , Johns Hopkins University 
2010-2013.
.\"
.Sh FORMAT
The file consists of two lines of comments followed arbitrary lines of point-specific
options.  
.Ar surfgen
will process options from top down.  When conflicting options are given for the 
same point(s), later options will automatically override earlier ones without
warning.  Each option consists of a two character keyword and three integers, with
the input format
.br
.Va (A2,X,3I5)
.Pp
The keywords are 
.Em case insensitive .
If any state or point specifications exceeds the scope of data, it will
be ignored.  If a range of states or a range of points exceeds the boundary, it
will be rounded to the corresponding boundary.  For example, point range -2 to 5
will be automatically changed to 1 to 5, since the lowest allowed point index is 1.
Unrecognized keywords will be ignored with warning messages.
.Pp
The last two integer inputs will often be used to specify a range of states or points.
The program will recognize the smaller (larger) number in the pair and use it as 
the lower (upper) bound of the range.
.Sh KEYWORDS
This section contains description of supported keywords and the meaning of the 
corresponding integer input parameters.
.Ss Weight Data Points
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx -compact
.It Sy WT Em $wgt $pt1 $pt2 
Set the weight for points from
.Va $pt1
to
.Va $pt2 .
When 
.Em $wgt=0 ,
the points in the range will be excluded.
When
.Em $wgt>0 ,
the points in the range will be weighed by factor 
.Va $wgt .
When
.Em $wgt<0 ,
the points in the range will be weighed by factor
.Sy 1/abs($wgt) .
.El
.Ss Exact Equations
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx -compact
.It Sy LE Em $pnt $st1 $st2 
Fit the energy(energies) of electronic states from 
.Va $st1
to 
.Va $st2
at point
.Va $pnt
exactly with Lagrange multipliers.  Naturally, it is recommended that
.Em 1<=$st1,$st2<=$nstates 
and 
.Va $pnt
specifies a valid point.  Note that setting the weight of a point to 0 will
override the exact condition and remove the exact equations at the point. 
.It Sy LD Em $pnt $st1 $st2
Fits the 
.Em energy difference
between states
.Va $st1
and
.Va $st2
at point
.Va $pnt
exactly with Lagrange multipliers.  They do not have to be adjacent states.
Note that setting the weight of a point to 0 will override the exact condition 
and remove the exact equations at the point. 
.It Sy LG Em $pnt $st1 $st2
Fit gradient or coupling associated with states 
.Va $st1 
and 
.Va $st2 
exactly at point 
.Va $pnt.
When 
.Em $st1=$st2 ,
this option specifies the energy gradient vector of a state; otherwise, it 
specifies the derivative coupling between states 
.Va $st1 
and 
.Va $st2 .
.El
.Ss Excluding Equations
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx -compact
.It Sy EE Em $pnt $st1 $st2
Exclude energy of block 
.Em $st1,$st2
for point 
.Va $pnt .
This could specify either a diagonal or off-diagonal block.  Note that 
off-diagonal block may or may not be fit to 0, depending on the value of option
.Ar DijScale
in 
.Pa surfgen.in .
.It Sy EG Em $pnt $st1 $st2
Exclude gradient or derivative coupling data for point 
.Va $pnt .
When 
.Em $st1=$st2 ,
this option specifies the energy gradient vector of a state; otherwise, it 
specifies the derivative coupling between states 
.Va $st1 
and 
.Va $st2 .
.El
.Ss Gradient Ordering
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx -compact
.It Sy GO Em $pnt $st1 $st2
Enforce states from 
.Va $st1
to
.Va $st2
to be ordered by gradient matching instead of energy matching at point
.Va $pnt .
Note that this option can be overriden when gradient ordering is turned off 
altogether by setting 
.Em gOrder/[u2264]0
in
.Pa surfgen.in .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr surfgen 1 ,
.Xr surfgen.in 1
.Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs
Please send bug reports to 
.An Xiaolei Zhu Aq virtualzx@gmail.com
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner
