.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 3/11/13               \" DATE 
.Dt surfgen.in 1      \" Program name and manual section number
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm surgen.in ,
.Nd General input file for 
.Sy surfgen .
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
This input file is used by coupled potential surface fitting program
.Sy surfgen 
and its potential evaluation library.
For a detailed description of the program and the evaluation library, see
.Xr surfgen 1 ,
.Xr potlib 1
.Pp
Place
.Sy surfgen.in
in the same directory where
.Sy surfgen
is being called.
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
is a Fortran 90 namelist input file.  This file contains input parameters that 
controls the behavior of 
.Sy surfgen .
This includes the 
.Sy GENERAL
namelist input that specify the job type and, along with other input files, 
defines the molecular system, the electronic states, their symmetry, the internal
coordinate basis and the expansion of Hd.  Most job types will have another namelist
that defines parameters that are specific to a job, except for 
.Em jobtype=-1 .
.Pp
The evaluator library also use the general namelist to define the expansion.  It
also use a POTLIB namelist to define behaviors such as geometry logging and error
estimation.
.Pp
Developed by 
.An Yarkony group , Johns Hopkins University 
2010-2013.
.\"
.Sh NAMELIST INPUT
.Ss GENERAL
General input that controls the expansion ansatz of the quasi-diabatic Hamiltonian (Hd),
and the job to be performed by
.Sy surfgen .
Input files 
.Ar connect.in ,
.Ar coord.in ,
and
.Ar irrep.in
also contain detailed parameters about the definition of the ansatz.
.Pp
.Sy List of Input Parameters
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
./"VariableName DefaultValue Descriptions
.It jobtype
.Sy INTEGER [0] 
Specifies the type of job to be performed. Currently the following
Types are implemented:
.Bl -tag -width xxx 
.It -1
Use the molecule and connectivity definitions to generate all feasible symmetry 
permutations and print them to the standard output.
.It 0
Do nothing during execution.  During initialization the program will construct 
the expansion and read the coefficients from Hd storage file.   
Used by potential evaluation libraries only. Requires namelist: 
.Em POTLIB
.It 1
Construct fit Hd from ab initio data. Required namelist: 
.Em MAKESURF
.It 2
Find minima or conical intersections on the ab initio surface corresponding to a 
fit Hd.   Requires namelist:
.Em MINMEX
.El
.It natoms
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Number of atoms in the molecular system.   It is usually unwise to use the
default value of this parameter.
.It order
.Sy INTEGER [2]
Maximum order of the Hd expansion.  Order here means the number of basis functions
that are multiplied together, should they be same type of coordinate or not,
in the form of coordinates defined in 
.Ar coord.in.
.It atmgrp
.Sy INTEGER,dimension(natoms)
Array that specify the equivalency of the atoms.  Must contain
.Em natoms
elements, each of which specify the group index of an atom.  Atoms in the same
group are considered equivalent by the program and the permutations among them 
will be generated as symmetry operations.
.It nGrp
.Sy INTEGER 
Number of electronic state groups.  Each group contains a set of electronic 
states that carry an irreducible representation.  For example, for OH radical 
the lowest 3 states are contained in 2 groups, an E group with 2 states and 
A group with 1 state.
.It groupsym
.Sy INTEGER,dimension(ngrp) 
Index of permutational irreducible representations carried by each 
of the state groups.  For each irrep, representation matrices for 
every permutation must be supplied in input file irrep.in
Irreps are indexed as they appear in 
.Ar irrep.in
.It groupprty
.Sy INTEGER,dimension(ngrp) 
Inversion symmetry (parity) of each of the state group.
.It printlvl
.Sy INTEGER [1]
Controls the level of infomation printed to standard output. 
0 is lowest and 5 is highest level.
.It inputfl
.Sy CHARACTER(72) ['hd.data']
Name of Hd expansion coefficient input file.  Hd will be initialized using
these coefficients.  When empty or file not exist, uncoupled surface with 
constant (but not identical) energies will be used to initialize Hd.
.El
.Ss MAKESURF
This namelist contains parameters that control the surface fitting procedure.
These are only used for
.Em jobtype=-1 .
.Pp
.Sy Data Selection and Weighing
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It npoints 
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Number of points to be fit.
.It eshift
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [.0]
A uniform shift applied to all 
.Ar ab initio 
energies.
.It gcutoff
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-14]
The threshold below which gradients will be considered vanished and treated as exactly 0.
.It usefij
.Sy LOGICAL [.true.] 
Specifies if the derivative couplings instead of derivative coupling times
energy differences will be used as coupling input.  Derivative couplings approach
infinity at intersections while coupling times energy difference remain well 
behaved everywhere.  The program expect either input file name to follow 
.Ar COLUMBUS
file name convention, with derivative coupling file named as
.Pa cartgrd_total.drt1.stateX.drt1.stateY 
and coupling times energy difference as
.Pa cartgrd.nad.drt1.stateX.drt1.stateY
.It w_energy
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
Weight factor for energy equations.  This factor is multiplied with point weights
and high energy scaling weights to yield the final weight of equations.
.It w_grad
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
Weight factor for energy gradient equations. This factor is multiplied with point weights
and high energy scaling weights to yield the final weight of equations.
.It w_fij
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
Weight factor for coupling equations. This factor is multiplied with point weights
and high energy scaling weights to yield the final weight of equations.
.It energyT
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION,dimension(10) [1D30]
.It highEScale
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION,dimension(10) [1.]
.Em energyT
specifies a series of thresholds for the downscaling of equations when the ab initio
energy of an electronic state is very high.   When
.Em E>energyT(i) ,
weight 
.Sy highEScale(i)
is applied to the energy, gradient and derivative coupling equations that involve 
that state.   For couplings, the higher state is used to determine the weight.  
The highest possible energy bracket (with lowest weight) will be used.
.It ediffcutoff
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [20.]
.It nrmediff
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [2D4]
The weight for derivative coupling equations is weighed down by factor
.Sy nrmediff/(\[u0394]E+ediffcutoff) .
This weighing procedure is due to the fact that coupling times energy difference
is being fit instead of the coupling itself, which is singular near intersections.
Increasing the weight according to energy difference ensures that residue couplings
are properly minimized, and the cutoff term prevents problematic singular behavior.
This prevents the mathematical complexity of directly taking deratives of the couplings
with respect to fitting coefficients, which will give rise to term that correspond
to change in energy difference.
.It ediffcutoff2
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
.It nrmediff2
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [100.]
Similar to the above case, the energy equations are weighed up by factor
.Sy nrmediff2/(\[u0394]E+ediffcutoff2)
if this value is greater than 1.   This is to ensure that energy differences
are properly reproduced for points that are close to degeneracy.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Fitting Algorithm and Acceleration
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It maxiter
.Sy INTEGER [3]
Maximum number of iterations for the fitting algorithm.
.It toler
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-3]
Convergence tolerance for change in expansion coefficient.
.It maxd
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D0]
Maximum allowed change in Hd expansion coefficients between iterations. 
.It dfstart
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Iteration at which differential convergence will be started.  The normal equations
will be constructed for the 
.Em change
of coefficients instead of expansion coefficients themselves.  This will usually
result in better fit and allows dumping while lifting the flattening term to very
small value.  However, this convergence mode has more tendency to experience 
oscillations and should not be enabled if the fit is qualitatively incorrect.
.br
It is recommended that when differential convergence is enabled, set
.Em DijScale=1
and 
.Em DijScale2=1
.It exactTol 
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-12]
Eigenvalue cutoff when solving constrained normal equations.  This parameter dictates
how accurate the exact equations will be reproduced.
.It LSETol 
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-7]
Diagonal shift on the normal equations when solving linear equations.  Larger value leads 
to more stable but usually slower convergence.  
.It flattening
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-8]
Flattening term that will be included in the objective function.  In differential 
convergence mode, this option will remove contributions that have very small contributions
to the quality of fit.  As opposed to 
.Ar LSETol ,
which only changes the convergence procedure but does not affect the converged results,
.Ar flattening 
changes the Lagrangian and thus will result in a different converged Hd.
.It ndiis
.Sy INTEGER [10]
Maximum dimensionality of DIIS interpolation space
.It ndstart
.Sy INTEGER [10]
The number of iterations to start DIIS interpolation.
.It linSteps
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Number of linear steps to perform.  When greater than 0, the program will break the 
predicted change into 
.Sy linSteps
smaller steps and try to find the step length that yields the smallest gradient
for the Lagrangian.  Step sizes are automatically shrinked when the norm of the 
gradient increases.
.It linNegSteps
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Number of linear steps to be taken to the opposite direction of the predicted change
but with the same size.  This should only be used when the normal equations fail
to give the correct direction of changes and the linear steps towards the positive
direction encounter an immediate increase in the norm of Lagrangian.
.It DijScale
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
This option controls the multiplier of the derivative of eigenvectors with respect
to the fitting coefficients.  When set to 0, the dependency of eigenvectors on 
fitting coefficients are ignored.  When set to 1, the first order response of 
eigenvectors with respect to the change in fitting coefficients is fully implemented.
This option is used by the construction of normal equations as well as evaluation
of gradients of the Lagrange multipliers.  It is recommended to have 
.Em DijScale=1.0 
in most cases.   It only needs to be turned down when eigenvectors are changing 
too rapidly and gives oscillations.
.It DijScale2
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
Similar to 
.Sy DijScale ,
this option is an additional multiplier that only scales the eigenvector derivatives
in the normal equations, but does not affect the evaluation of Lagrangian gradients.
.It scaleEx
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
Uniformly scale all exact equations.  Since there is no weight for exact equations,
this is done through scaling the gradient of the Lagrangian with respect to Lagrange
multipliers.  This option normally does not need to be changed.  Only use it when 
convergence problems occur.
.It stepMethod
.Sy INTEGER [0]
This option specifies the algorithm used for fitting procedure.  Currently 
.Em method 0
uses linear equality constrained least squares equations and 
.Em method 1
uses gradient projection technique.  
.Sy Method 1 is not working very well at the moment.  Please use 0.
.It ExConv
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-5]
Convergence criteria for exact equations.  Used by 
.Em stepMethod=1 .
.It maxED
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-2]
Maximum step length for exact step.  Used by
.Em stepMethod=1 .
.It mmiter
.Sy INTEGER [10]
Number of micro iterations for 
.Em stepMethod=1 .
.It gscaler
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-5]
Scaling factor for projected gradient.  Used by 
.Em stepMethod=1 .
.El
./"  DELETED: EXPANSION_INPUT, EXPANSION_OUTPUT
.Pp
.Sy Eigenvector Ordering and Phasing
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It enfDiab
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Specify a point where diabatic and adiabatic representation will be forced to coincide.
Every iteration the program will force the eigenvector of this point to be unit vectors.
The off-diagonal element will be fit to 0 and the derivative of eigenvectors at this 
point (Dij) will also be 0 under all conditions.  
.br
The adiabatic-diabatic transformation is subject to a globally constant transformation.
Since such transformation does not affect the Hamiltonian in any manner, it cannot be 
determined from the fitting procedure itself. When states have different symmetry, 
such degree of freedom can be removed through the use of correct symmetry.  When some
states carry the same symmetry, this option is used to eliminate the extra degree of freedom.
.It gorder
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-3]
Threshold for energy difference below which the states will by ordered by gradients 
instead of absolute energy.  This option is ignored when 
.Em followPrev=.true.
.It ckl_input
.Sy CHARACTER(72) ['']
Input file that contains the initial guess of eigenvectors at each data point.  
When left empty or file not exist, the eigenvectors are initialized by diagonalizing
initial Hd.
.It ckl_output
.Sy CHARACTER(72) ['ckl.out']
Output file that contains the final eigenvectors at each data point.
.It followPrev
.Sy LOGICAL [.false.]
Whether the new eigenvectors will be ordered and phased to match the vectors 
from the previous iteration.  This allows a more consistent and smoother convergence
but may increase the tendency to match the states in a non-optimal way.
.It maxRot
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [.0]
When set greater than 0, the eigenvectors rotation between rotations are monitored 
and when the rotation is larger than this parameter the rotation is dumped to this value.
.Sy HAVE NOT BEEN TESTED FOR MORE THAN 2 STATES.  DO NOT USE IT IF YOU HAVE >2 STATES!
.El
.Pp
.Sy Local Coordinate Construction
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It useIntGrad
.Sy LOGICAL [.true.]
Specifies wether the gradients and derivative couplings will be fit using Cartesian 
components or a transformed coordinate constructed at each point that removes the
null equations (translations, rotations, relative motion of dissociated fragments 
and symmetry zeros).  This coordinate is constructed by obtaining the eigenvectors
of matrix B^T.B, where B is the Wilson's B matrix.
.It intGradT
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-3]
Threshold for eigenvalue cut off of B^T.B matrix.   When an eigenvalue is lower than
.Em intGradT ,
the coordinate is considered non-internal and removed from the fitting equaitons.
.It intGradS
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-1]
Threshold for diminished weights.  New coordinates that correspond to eigenvalues lower than
.Em intGradS 
will be weighed by factor
.Sy ev/intGradS ,
where
.Sy ev
is the eigenvalue.
.It gScaleMode
.Sy INTEGER [2]
Controls how the gradients and couplings will be weighed according to 
.Em intGradS .
Available scaling methods are :
.Bl -tag -width xxxx -compact
.It =0   
Do not scale
.It >0   
Scale all coordinates
.It <0   
Scale couplings only
.El
.It deg_cap
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-5]
Threshold for energy difference below which the states will be considered degenerate.
Intersection adapted coordinate will be used for these electronic states.   
.Em Degeneracy for more than 2 states is coded but never tested.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Removal of Null Space
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It TBas
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1D-6]
Theshold for eigenvalue cutoff of the primitive basis overlap matrix.  This 
controls the degree of linear dependency that will be allowed in the basis 
constructed for the fit.
.It ecutoff
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [1.]
Energy threshold in 
.Em hartree
above which the energy data will not be considered in null space removal procedure.
This is used to prevent the equations that are irrelevant from introducing extra
degrees of freedom.
.It egcutoff
.Sy DOUBLE PRECISION [0.6]
The gradients and couplings data of a point will not be considered in null space
removal procedure when the ab initio energy of the lowest state is higher than 
this value.  Similar to 
.Sy ecutoff ,
this parameter is used to prevent irrelevant high energy data points from introducing
unnecessary degrees of freedom.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Input and Output
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It outputfl
.Sy CHARACTER(72) ['']
Name of the output file that will store the fit surface.
.It flheader
.Sy CHARACTER(72) ['----']
Header that will be printed into the description field of Hd storage file.
.It rmsexcl
.Sy INTEGER [0]
This parameter controls if low weight points will be included in the RMS analysis.
Points with weight lower than 
.Sy -1/rmsexcl 
will be excluded when 
.Em rmsexcl<0 .
No effect when 
.Em rmsexcl>=0
.El
.Pp
.Sy Testing
.Bl -tag -width VariableNm -compact
.It ntest
.Sy INTEGER [0]
Number of test points.   When greater than 0, Hd gradient test will be performed.
Used only for debugging purpose.
.El
.Ss POTLIB
Parameters that control the behavior of the potential evaluation library.
.br
.Sy For the moment, please use default settings.
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr connect.in 1
.Xr coords.in 1 ,
.Xr irrep.in 1 ,
.Xr hd.data 1 ,
.Xr points.in 1 ,
.Xr potlib 1 ,
.Xr surfgen 1 ,
.Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs
Please send bug reports to 
.An Xiaolei Zhu Aq virtualzx@gmail.com
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner