.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 2/20/13               \" DATE 
.Dt surfgen 1      \" Program name and manual section number 
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm surfgen ,
.\" The following lines are read in generating the apropos(man -k) database. Use only key
.\" words here as the database is built based on the words here and in the .ND line. 
.Nm surfgen.global
.\" Use .Nm macro to designate other names for the documented program.
.Nd fit quasi-diabatic Hamiltonian from ab initio data.
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
.\"
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
applies the quasi-diabatic Hamiltonian(Hd) approach to construct coupled potential 
energy surfaces from ab initio data.  Evaluation libraries are also provided to 
allow spectroscopy and dynamics simulation programs to access fit potentials, either
in diabatic or adiabatic representation.
.Pp
Here,
.Em quasi-diabatic
means the residual coupling, the coupling between diabatic states, is minimized in 
a least squares sense in the fitting procedure.  The diabatic representation used by
Hd is therefore the most diabatic representation in a leaset squares sense.
.Pp
Developed by 
.An Yarkony group , Johns Hopkins University 
2010-2013.
.Pp                      \" Inserts a space
.\"
.Sh FEATURES
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Begins a tagged list 
.It Em Fitting Ab Initio Data               \" Each item preceded by .It macro
The program is capable of fitting energy, energy gradient and derivative coupling 
(AKA nonadiabatic coupling or vibronic coupling) data obtained from ab initio calculations.
A weighed least squares procedure is used to generate the fit to simultaneously 
optimize the reproduction of adiabatic energies and energy gradients and the diabaticity
of the quasi-diabaticrepresentation, defined by the residual coupling between diabatic states.
Lagrange multipliers are used to enable the exact reproduction of arbitrary selected set 
of data, such as energy and gradients at critical points on the potential or energy 
difference and derivative couplings at points of conical intersections.
.\"
.It Em Nonadiabatic couplings and Seams of Conical Intersections
The Hd approach is capable of extremely accurate description of nonadiabatic interactions.
It has been used to successfully describe large portions of the seam of conical 
intersections, spanning completely different geometrically structures.  This is enabled
by the application of intersection adapted coordinates.  
.\"
.It Em Flexibility
The program allows the user to define the blocks of the matrix Hd with a large set of 
customizable basis functions, enabling the flexibility to describe complex features on the
surface to a high level of accuracy.
.\"
.It Em Global Symmetry Treatment
Projection operator method is used to allow the program to use an arbitrary subgroup of the
Complete Nuclear Permutation Inversion group to construct symmetry adapted basis for the 
fitting procedure.  With the help of such feature, the program can correctly treat the 
symmetry in problems that involve large amplitude motions, as well as vibrational problems.
.\"
.It Em Efficiency
With the fully analytical form of Hd, the evaluation time for a single point is usually
within 50ms.   Future update is planned to allow vectorized evaluation of large number of data points.
.\"
The fitting program achieve high efficiency through the extensive use of optimized and threaded
LAPACK and BLAS libraries.   Other functionalities such as automatic local internal coordinate
construction, automatic null space removal and GDIIS extrapolations provide tools to
enhance performance.
.El                      \" Ends the list
.Pp
.Sh ENVIRONMENT      \" May not be needed
.Bl -tag -width "ENV_VAR_1  " \" ENV_VAR_1 is width of the string ENV_VAR_1
.It Ev stacksize
In order to allow smooth execution, please remove the limit for stacksize.  use
.Pp
.Sy limit stacksize unlimited
.Pp
in csh or tcsh, or
.Pp
.Sy ulimit -s unlimited
.Pp
in sh or bash
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_2
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_2
.El
.Sh FILES                \" File used or created by the topic of the man page
.Bl -tag -width "connect.in "
.It Pa surfgen.in
General input for the program, which specifies job specifications such as job type, 
fitting basis and expansion, molecule composition, state symmetry etc.  This file 
also includes options for each type of jobs such as optimization and evaluation.
For a detailed list of parameters, see 
.Xr surfgen.in 1
./"  -->>  output file -->>
.It Pa surfgen.out
Standard output file that contains the statistics of the data points, Hd expansion 
and fitting equations, followed by brief summary (1 line per iteration) of the fitting
procedure, and analysis of the final fit.
./"  -->> output to the terminal -->>
.It Pa stdout
Detailed information are printed to the standard output, including details about coordinates,
symmetry, expansion, local coordinate construction, null space removal, iterative procedure
etc.  The amount of output can be controlled with parameter
.Ar printlvl
in 
.Ar surfgen.in .
./"  -->>  Hd oefficient file -->>
.It Pa hd.data
Default name for the storage file of the quasi-diabatic Hamiltonian(Hd).  
The name of the file can be specified in 
.Ar surfgen.in .
Currently only expansion coefficients is stored in 
.Ar hd.data .
The expansion is instead defined in 
.Ar surfgen.in .
For a detailed description of the format of Hd storage files, see
.Xr hd.data 1
./"  -->>  Point specification file -->>
.It Pa points.in
Point specification file for surface fitting. Specifies special fitting options for 
individual data points or a set of individual data points.  Currently the options include
.Bl -enum
.It 
Exclusion of energies, gradients or derivative couplings for a specific state or block
.It 
Enforcing exact reproduction of energies, energy difference, gradients or derivative
couplings of a specific state or block through the use of Lagrange multipliers.
.It 
Changing the weight in for a set of data points in the fitting equations.  The weights
can be an increase or decrease from the default weight of 1.0, or be set to zero.
.El
For details of the format of file
.Ar points.in ,
see
.Xr points.in 1
.Pp
This file is only required for surface fitting jobs.
./"  -->>  Coordinate definition -->>
.It Pa coords.in
Coordinate definition file.  The file defines a set of internal coordinates that will 
be used as basis for the fitting program. The coordinates are defined by specifying the 
.Em types
and 
.Em scaling modes
of coordinate, as well as the atoms involved in the
coordinate and scaling parameters for certain modes.  The maximum order allowed for each
coordinate and 
.Em additional order constraints 
are also defined in this file.
For a detailed description of input format and list of coordinate types and scaling modes
provided by the program, see
.Xr coords.in 1
.Pp
Note that the coordinate defined here serves as global basis and this may be, and in
general will be, redundant at a specificy geometry.  Change in this file will change the 
expansion and therefore will require 
.Ar hd.data
file to be regenerated.
./"  -->>  Irreducible representation input -->>
.It Pa irrep.in
Representation definition file.  This file defines the representation
.Em matrices
(not just characters) for each irreducible representation of the 
.Em permutation group
used by the fitting procedure.  Note that inversion symmetry is specified separately in
.Ar surfgen.in .
The user has to generate all irreducible representation matrices.  This feature may be
added in the future.  The user is responsible for the validation of the representations,
otherwise the result may be unreliable.  For a list of symmetry operations, call
.Nm
with 
.Em jobtype=-1 .
For details about the format of this file, see
.Xr irrep.in 1
./"  -->>  Connectivity input for subgroup and fragment definition -->>
.It Pa connect.in
Connectivity defintion file.  This file defines the bonds that will not be broken
throughout the scope of Hd.  The name of this file can be changed in 
.Ar surfgen.in .
.Pp
A set of feasible permutations will be selected based
on the perservation of the connectivity matrix defined by this file.  As a result,
this file simultanesouly defines the fragments that will remain intact and a 
subgroup of the full CNPI group that will be used to construct the surface.
.Pp
This feature is used to enable mixed local and global type of expansions to significantly
cut down the number of coordinates, making large problems tractable.  Note that change
in this file will change the symmetry group and therefore will require regeneration of
.Ar irrep.in
and
.Ar hd.data
files.  For a detailed description of the format of this file, see
.Xr connect.in 1
./"  -->>  Ab initio data -->>
.It Em Ab initio Data
Ab initio data input files for surface fitting program.  In each input file, one specific 
type of ab initio data for all data points are appended together.   For gradients and 
derivative couplings, components must be given in Cartesian coordinates.   Use
.Ar COLUMBUS 
input/output format for all data files.   A list of input files include
./" {   >>>>> beginning of ab initio data files list >>>>>
.Bl -tag -compact -width  "energy.all "
.It Pa geom.all 
Cartesian geometry file for all data points.  
.Ar COLUMBUS
format is used, where each line contains atom name (character*3),  nuclear charge (f),
cartesian coordinates (3f) and atomic weight (f).   Only the coordinate information is
used in the fitting process.  Data for different geometries are appended together.
.It Pa energy.all
Energy information file.  All energies are given in hartree.  Each line much contain 
the energies of all the states for one data point, given in floating point or scientific
format.  The number of states is specified in 
.Ar surfgen.in .
The number and ordering of data points must be consistent with
.Ar geom.all .
Data for all points and states must be present.  If an energy data is absent, put in 
any number (for example, .0) then specify it to be ignored in 
.Ar points.in .
.It Pa cartgrd.drt1.state?.all
Adiabatic energy gradient data for one particular electronic state.  Each line contains
three floating point or scientific numbers specifying the component of the energy gradient
vector on one atom.  The data for all atoms and geometries are appended with the same order
as in 
.Ar geom.all .
Data for all atoms must be present.  One input file has to be given for each state.  If 
a gradient data is absent, put in any number (for example, .0) then specify it to be 
excluded in 
.Ar points.in .
Empty lines are ignored.
.It Pa cartgrd.nad.drt1.state?.drt2.state?.all
.It Pa cartgrd_total.drt1.state?.drt2.state?.all
Derivative coupling data of all data points between two specific states.  The format is 
identical with energy gradient input files.  One file has to be given for each pair of 
states.   The "_total" files contain the actually derivative coupling data, which 
approach infinity at conical intersections, while the data in ".nad" files are obtained by
multiplying the derivative couplings by energy difference, i.e. the matrix element of the
derivative of the Hamiltonian operator, which does not experience singularity.  These
files are consistent with 
.Ar COLUMBUS
output with 
.Em nadcalc=3
and 
.Em nadcalc=1 .
If 
.Em usefij=0
in 
.Ar surfgen.in ,
".nad" files are used.  Otherwise "_total" files are used.  
.El 
./" }     <<<<< end of ab initio data files list <<<<<
.El                      \" Ends the list
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.Xr connect.in 1 ,
.Xr coords.in 1 ,
.Xr irrep.in 1 ,
.Xr hd.data 1 ,
.Xr points.in 1 ,
.Xr surfgen.in 1 ,
.Sh REFERENCES
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy Quadratic local Hd
./"  Reference for Michael paper (local Hd)
.Rs 
.%T "On the vibronic coupling approximation: A generally applicable approach for determining fully quadratic quasidiabatic coupled electronic state Hamiltonians"
.%A "Michael Schuurman"
.%A "David Yarkony" 
.%J "J. Chem. Phys."
.%N 127 
.%P 094104
.%D 2007
.Re
.br 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.2756540
./"  Reference for global Hd paper
.It Sy Generalized algorithm for global problems
.Rs 
.%T "Toward eliminating the electronic structure bottleneck in nonadiabatic dynamics on the fly: An algorithm to fit nonlocal, quasidiabatic, coupled electronic state Hamiltonians based on ab initio electronic structure data"
.%A "Xiaolei Zhu"
.%A "David Yarkony" 
.%J "J. Chem. Phys."
.%N 132
.%P 104101
.%D 2010
.Re
.br 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3324982
.It Sy Example: NH3 photodissociation branching ratio
.Rs 
.%T "First principles determination of the NH2/ND2(,) branching ratios for photodissociation of NH3/ND3 via full-dimensional quantum dynamics based on a new quasi-diabatic representation of coupled ab initio potential energy surfaces"
.%A "Jianyi Ma"
.%A "Hua Guo" 
.%A "Xiaolei Zhu"
.%A "David Yarkony" 
.%J "J. Chem. Phys."
.%N 137
.%P 22A541
.%D 2012
.Re
.br
http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4753425
.El
.Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs
Please send bug reports to 
.An Xiaolei Zhu Aq virtualzx@gmail.com
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner